The conference and to the first of
two back-to-back printing sessions.
Two and a half hours of printing
for those of you who are going
to stay for both sessions.
Could be worse.
I was up in Seattle in May this year
and sat through almost a whole day
of printing so only two and a half.
The title of this slide says "Advances
in Application Printing" and we are going
to talk about the Print Dialog a lot.
But if any of you work on printer
drivers and other kinds of software
related to the printing system,
this session is still for you.
We do have content in here
that's directly relevant.
So don't go out for coffee yet.
I'd like to say that, you know, by now,
I mean,
Mac OS X is more than five years old.
And I think we're getting close to that
point in time when you guys know what
your code is supposed to do to print.
And then we know what our
code is supposed to do.
And I'd like to think we're
getting close to that point in
time when printing just works.
But there's still plenty of work to do.
And I hope after you've heard what we've
had to say in the next hour or two,
you'll agree that we're
getting closer to that goal.
And if you support us,
do some of the things we're
asking you to do today.
I'm sure that Leopard customers
will be much more happy with
printing compared with Tiger and
earlier versions of Mac OS X.
So, as this slide says,
we're going to talk
about the print dialog.
Not just the print dialog,
but that's a major topic.
And you all know that
printing is a team effort.
Applications do your work,
printer drivers do their work,
and somewhere in the middle,
some Apple code gets to do its stuff.
And if we all do the right things,
then everything you see in your
document window gets put down on paper
in the right place and the right color,
etc.
But we all need to play our
respective parts and try not
to step on each other's toes.
And the Print Dialog, I guess,
is the most critical part of that system
where we all have to get along together.
Maybe it's the most contested
piece of screen real estate we have
because it's a threesome effort
to get everything working together.
You know, those questions of who
owns the Print Dialog,
the priorities of various features,
how they interact with each other.
And so, of course,
with the new version of Mac OS X,
we've had to put some thought into
how to make all that work well.
As a prelude to this discussion,
I went looking for old screenshots.
And to tell you the truth,
it's not that hard to
find the really old ones.
Here's one from,
I guess this is about 13 years ago,
early version of the LaserWriter driver.
And back then,
the driver owned the Print Dialog,
and the application had
to ask Pretty Please if it
wanted to add any settings.
And if you look closely,
you'll see a couple of
checkboxes that the application's
added to the Print Dialog.
Around the same vintage,
we had another printing system and
this had a slightly different print
dialog and a different mechanism for
applications to be able to add their
controls for print time features.
So back then it was kind of a pain for
applications to be able to do what they
wanted to do with all the different
print drivers out there at the time.
By the way, this one had a nice feature.
If you see,
there's a fewer choices button.
So there was a simplified and
advanced view of the print dialog.
Quite a good innovation at the time.
Another thing that we've had to deal
with as the Print Dialogs evolved
is just the growing list of things
that you can do at print time.
Growing list of things that
applications want to allow you to do
to customize what comes out on paper.
A growing list of things that the
printer and its driver wants to
make available to you when the
time comes to print your document.
That's about,
I forget how long ago this is,
but at least six years I guess, since...
That's when we started to add
extra panels to the Print Dialog.
LaserWriteRate had a drop-down
menu so that you could switch
between different panels.
That, of course,
introduced topics like how do
you deal with interdependencies
between various features.
And we weren't the only ones who
were working on the Print Dialog.
Here's one, kind of recent.
This is PostScript printing on Windows.
and another one,
this is Printing Joy and Inkjet,
Raster Printer on Windows.
And we even have...
Screenshot from one of the Linux distros.
So I guess the point I'm trying
to make is lots of people
working on the Print Dialog.
We've got to this point today with
Tiger and we're starting to realize
that there isn't a Print Dialog,
sorry,
there isn't a perfect Print Dialog,
but we have to make the Print Dialog as
simple as possible and we have to make
it as easy as possible for you to extend
the Print Dialog if you need to and do
it in a way that doesn't confuse you.
confuse the user.
I'd have to say that if
you look at Tiger today,
and this is what you
get with some printers,
you just have an intimidating
experience when you click on
that Print Dialog Extension menu.
Just too many features.
So for Leopard,
and anybody who's actually installed
Leopard will already have known this,
we kind of went back to square one.
And we thought this was quite
a nice printing experience.
Works for me.
And you know,
the printing system's just going
to use extra sensory perception
to figure out what you want
and just do the right thing.
But of course, life's a little bit more
complicated than that.
So we've ended up with this as the first
view that the user gets when they go
to print from a particular application.
Of course, there's more to it than that,
and that's what we're going
to explain this morning.
I just want to make a
couple of quick points.
One is that what you got today with
your Leopard Seed is not the last word.
We've got more improvements
in the pipeline.
The other thing I want to say is,
although there's not a
lot of time to do this,
based on what you hear this morning,
give us your feedback.
We may be able to incorporate some
of your changes and suggestions.
That said, I think we've done a good
job making it easier for you
to extend the Print Dialog,
customize it.
I just want to finish by saying
please try to keep things simple.
Go for consistency.
And if you have any issues, talk to us.
Try not to work around the way we've
implemented the Print Dialog and the way
we've made it easy for you to enhance it.
And with that,
I'm going to hand over for
the technical stuff to Alan.
He's going to show you how to work
with the Print Dialog in Leopard.
Thanks very much.
Thank you.
I'm Alan Beck.
I've been at Apple 15 years
now and 13 of those past 15
years have been in printing.
So I've been there a long time.
I know all those dialogues
that Paul showed and some
of the ones before that.
So it's been quite a ride.
So now on to the...
Simple Print Dialog.
This is the first major redesign
of the Print Dialog we have
done in over seven years.
Basically, since we started your first
developer preview for OS X.
That was when we basically,
the system took over the Print Dialog
and we didn't have the drivers
in charge of the Print Dialog.
We have found that the
majority of our users just do a
Command P and return to print.
It's mainly about what some
of the application developers
want or driver developers want,
but that is the reality of the world.
So we wanted to make the first dialog,
Print Dialog, that the user sees simple.
To give the users the minimum
number of options to choose from.
Simplicity is the user
doesn't have to make a choice.
So here we have given the user the
choice of selecting the printer,
selecting a preset if they want to,
and we've given them the PDF workflow
button and the preview button,
and of course the cancel and print.
We've already gotten the bug,
where did my print options go?
So you guys don't need to write that bug,
we already have it.
So what the user would have to do to
get the rest of the buttons is just
click the little disclosure button.
And we do get the expanded dialog.
And this is where the full
functionality of the drivers and
the applications can be seen.
And if you just want to get
back to the simple print dialog,
just click the button again.
Now let's talk a little about
the interaction of the simple
and the expanded Print Dialog.
The state of the closure button
is saved on a per application,
per user basis.
In other words,
the next time you bring up the
Print Dialog in your application,
it will open up the state
that the user last had it as.
So this allows a user to say in mail,
always have the simple
Print Dialog shown.
They really don't care about
any of the... they have their
preset already set for mail.
They know how to print.
But say if you want to go to Word or
Pages or any other complex app
where the user does want control,
they can have the expanded Print Dialog
in that app and still have the simple
Print Dialog in your other app.
One thing I'd like to say is the
application does not control this.
It is a per user... it is
controlled by the user.
Now let's talk a little bit
about the expanded print dialog.
One of the major changes we've done is
we've made the application print panel
the first panel that the user sees.
We have been noticing that some
of the important print options
the users weren't able to find.
The application print panel was buried
deep down in the PDE menu and the
users just did not know how to find it.
So we brought the application
panel up front and it was the
first panel this user sees.
We've also brought the copies
and page range above the line.
It is now in the top
portion of the dialog.
So the user can always get to these
options without having to change panels.
One other thing we've done is we've
promoted the two-sided printing.
More and more printers are
coming standard with the duplex
option and the users are saying,
"How do I get two-sided printing
with this new feature that came with
my printer?" So we have promoted
it to the top portion of the dialog.
That way the user can see it.
always find it.
Paul alluded earlier to the panel pop-up
menu has become kind of unmanageable,
confusing,
and it's really kind of hard to
find what you're looking for.
In Leopard,
we've organized it a little bit
to alleviate some of the concerns.
We've added a separator
after the application panels,
and we've put separators around
the printer-specific panels.
In the short time that
we've been using it,
I've been using it,
it makes a big difference.
You wouldn't think three lines
can make such a big difference
in navigating this venue,
but it does.
We've also added the concept of last
used settings for another preset.
So we've had requests
from many users to say,
I want to print this document
the same way I just printed it.
Or say I have another document
I want to print it the same way
I just printed this last document.
What we do in the printing system
is every time the user hits Print,
we capture and save off the print
settings that they just printed with.
And then when the user goes
back to the Print Dialog,
they can just go ahead and select
this last used print settings and
we will load those settings in
the Print Dialog and users will be
able to print using those settings.
Another thing we've added,
we've had a lot of user requests
for this and developer requests.
We've added adding the page setup
functionality to the Print Dialog.
We are now allowing
applications to add paper size,
orientation,
and scale to the Print Dialog.
We mainly see this for applications
that are not document based.
We still have the page setup menu
for the users to use if you want to,
or for the application
users to use if you want to.
It reduces the number of page
setup and print dialog round trips.
How many times have you
brought up a web browser,
gone to print, didn't quite fit,
cancel out, go up to page setup,
set the scale, go through that,
bring up the print dialog, print again,
it's still not quite right.
Or another case is,
I know this will fit orientation,
I'm in the print dialog, oh,
I have to cancel out,
go to page setup and set orientation.
So now we are allowing applications
to opt in to this functionality.
They can choose which of the
page format options they want
to show in the print dialog.
And we were saying apps,
you can even remove the page
setup menu item if it makes sense
for your application if you've
added them to the print dialog.
Another thing we're allowing
the application to do is we can
put these page attributes not in
the top portion of the dialog,
but you can make it its
own little PDE as well.
Print Selection.
We are now providing a system,
a print system consistent way for
the user to select print selection.
Currently, it's kind of haphazard based
on the application buried deep
down in the application panel.
We are providing a consistent UI by
adding a third radio button to the pages,
to the page range where
the user can select,
I just want to print the selection.
Problem is we can't do that by ourselves.
We need the application's help.
You know what the selection is,
we can't print the selection.
So as herein is that the application
has to opt in to give us functionality
and when the user selects selection,
we will add the KPM Print Selection
Only key to the print settings,
then use the application,
we have to read that and only
print what the user has selected.
Another way of allowing the
application to do is override
our copies and page range.
You can specify that the copies and
page range not be shown altogether.
If it doesn't make sense for
your application to show copies,
don't show it.
And if your application can
do a better job of something,
let's say page range,
you can hide ours and show yours.
In this example,
you have a word processor.
It can do a better page range by
doing discontinuous page numbers.
So what your application would do would
be hide our page range and show theirs.
Now, talk about some of the APIs that
gives us functionality.
It's pretty simple.
It's an option field.
So here in Cocoa, you have these enums.
You have Show Copies, Page Range,
Paper Size, Orientation, Scaling.
And if you want to set them,
the NS Print Panel has added
these two methods for set options
so you can set the options and
actually get the current options.
We will be adding the options
for the Print Selection and
Page Attributes Panel in a future seed.
It's not quite there yet.
And here's the new printing,
the Carbon Printing APIs.
Same thing, option,
we have the option bits, we have copies,
page range.
Here we have the page range with
selection which will add that third
radio button that I showed you.
Paper size, orientation scale,
and the ability to show the page
attributes in its own separate PDE.
We also added a couple more APIs to
show the print dialog with options.
As you can see,
one of the last parameters is where you
pass in the print dialog options flags.
Another thing you might want to notice
here is page format is no longer const.
The application has to be able,
be ready to handle a page
format that has been modified.
That is not true today.
Currently in the print,
any of the print dialog commands,
it's const and we don't
change the page format.
But from now on,
we may be changing it for you or to you.
So let's just go over the demo apps.
Go over to--
This is purely a demo app.
It is not anything the user would see.
We had that confusion
a little bit earlier.
It is just to show you basically how an
application could turn on and off these
different fields on the Print Dialog.
I'm just saying this
is the default state.
Copies and page regions on.
Let's go ahead and bring
up the Print Dialog.
As you can see,
here's a simple Print Dialog.
have you can select the printer,
We have all the standard presets,
the help button, the PDF workflow,
preview, and the cancel and print.
Now let's go ahead and expand it.
As you can see,
we have the copies and page range,
the two-sided and the pages.
And this application doesn't
have an app-specific pane,
so we go to our first pane,
the system pane.
As you can see here,
here again we have the
printer-specific PDEs being shown here.
So let's cancel out of this.
Now let's go ahead and add
the page format options.
Here again you can see
we've added paper size,
full paper size pop up and we
tell you if it changes here.
We've added the orientation,
changed orientation and
we can change scale.
Let's go ahead and
cancel back out of this.
And here again, it's like, okay,
say I don't want
orientation and page range.
Okay, if I'm an app, I now say, okay,
look,
those options don't make sense to me.
I just want page size and scale.
You know,
just the scale moved over because we
didn't have the orientation as well,
and we don't have page range anymore.
Now let's just show it as the panel.
Here it is.
Okay, now we have the -- still
don't have page range,
as you can see, but we do have the page
attributes as a panel.
And lastly,
I'd like to show you the print selection.
Here again,
here we have the copies and we've added
the third radio button for the user
to select saying they want to print
just the selection that the app has.
What is really nice is,
let's close out of this,
is I have made a single
line change in Safari.
to add the print options to the page
format options to the Print Dialog.
And as you can see, here they are.
This is the standard web page.
Let's go ahead and preview this.
You know, standard, you know, US letter.
What is nice about Cocoa is
with this one line change,
I'm now able to say,
let's go to number 10 envelope,
do a landscape,
and let's reduce it 50 cents,
50%. Preview this, as you can see,
without any changes to the
Safari code other than the one
line code to add to set what print
options the user wants to see,
we now have
We now have that, we now have,
it's showing 50% on a envelope.
Now we are also working on
stuff that didn't quite make it
into the seed that you do have.
So if we switch back over to here.
Here we go.
Back there.
Now this is an unmodified
version of TextEdit.
I have made no changes
to TextEdit whatsoever.
We have done some stuff on
the printing system though.
This is like a 14 page document.
It was quite long, total gibberish.
Now let's go ahead and
bring up the Print Dialog.
We are working on adding inline
preview to the Print Dialog without
the app having to do anything.
As you can see, it is a live preview.
You can go forward and back, back,
forward.
We don't have all the controls
enabled to basically zoom in,
zoom out.
and uh... basically as you change
stuff over here it would change
the preview that you actually see.
So this is still a work in progress.
It didn't make it onto the Leopard
Sea but it is something that will be in
FutureSeed and in the
GM version of Leopard.
So if we go back over to slides.
To go along with this
refined print dialog,
we also have "refined"
the Page Setup dialog.
It now contains only the options
that affect document format.
Scaling is gone.
Applications are now
added to the Print Dialog.
If you think about scaling,
it wasn't so much page format.
It is how the data got put onto the page.
Reverse landscape has
been removed as well.
We've added a reverse page
orientation to the layout panel.
This way we can actually get that fourth
little button for reverse portrait
that users have been asking for.
And we were saying only document-based
applications should need a page setup.
Non-document-based applications can put
it in their print dialog and just remove
the whole page setup menu entirely.
So summary, customizing the Print Dialog.
Your application panel is
now the first panel shown.
That's a major change.
If your application
is not document based,
you now have the option to remove
the page setup menu and add the
controls to the Print Dialog.
We now have a standard way for the
user to select print selection.
And you as the application can specify
what is shown in the Print Dialog
that makes sense for your application.
And lastly,
the page setup contains only the
options that affect document format.
Let's move on to the
printing API in general.
If you have a Cocoa app,
you should use the Cocoa printing APIs.
It's a better fit for
the Cocoa applications.
To use the Printing System APIs, yes,
Carbon applications have to do it,
and currently your Cocoa app needs to
use it if they need more control over
the print settings and such like that.
But we are working very hard to bring
these two into parity by Leopard GM.
So here's a very simple example
of how to use the Cocoa APIs.
For most Cocoa APIs,
NSPrint operation is all that you need.
Basically you create a print operation,
tell it the view that you want to print,
and give it the print info,
and then you just run it
modally for the window,
giving it your document window,
and the selector is gonna be
called when the dialog goes away.
Here it is, and here you can just add a
few lines of code to get the
new Print Dialog features.
Here I get the print panel out
of the print operation and just
go ahead and set the options.
I get the current options
and I say I want to add,
I want to show paper size, orientation,
and scaling.
NS Print Accessory Controller is a
new file that has been added to Cocoa.
It's a simple way for the
Cocoa applications to add panels to
the print and page setup dialogs.
The NS Print Panel and NS Page Layout
Set Accessory View is now deprecated.
This is the new way for
Cocoa applications to add
panels to the print dialog.
It allows for multiple
application panels,
which you couldn't do before.
It allows you to specify
the title for the panel,
something you couldn't do before.
And in the future,
Leopard Seed will allow you to provide
summary information that will be shown.
in the summary panel of the Print Dialog.
This is kind of a word of wisdom for you.
For panels that are added
to the Print Dialog,
they should only be used
to provide print options,
not formatting options.
Here are the new NS Print Accessory
methods that have been added to the
print panel and the layout panel.
Basically you add a controller,
remove the controller,
and get a list of the
current controllers.
And here's a simple
example of how to use it.
You allocate a
Print Accessory Controller,
give it the name of where your
Panel lives and give it a title.
Then you add it to the accessory control,
you add it to the print panel
with the add accessory controller
and then you release it,
you're done with it.
The system will take
care of displaying it.
There again, look, there's a new file,
nsprintaccessorycontroller.h
in the AppKit interfaces.
So take a look at that for more
details and the AppKit release notes
for more details on how to use this.
Moving on to how Carbon Apps and
Print Driver developers can
add stuff to the print panel.
You've heard me talk before
about Cocoa-based print panels.
We couldn't release them due to
some runtime issues we were trying
to deal with and work through,
but now we are releasing them for Leopard
and they will run on 10.4 or later.
They're much slimmer to write,
no more boilerplate code,
and it takes about 25% the amount of
code as the old carbon-based PDEs.
Another thing that's very important
is these PDEs will run in 64-bit mode.
The old Carbon are 32-bit only.
It also gives you the
resolution independence,
if you've gone to some of the
other talks that you'll need.
Another thing is it allows
for PPD constraints handling.
That is something that we
have added for Leopard.
If you run these PDEs back in 10.4, no,
you won't get the constraints handling,
but it is something we
have added for Leopard.
And we have released a
Cocoa-based PDE sample code.
It's the Output Bins PDE.
If you look,
it's attached to this session.
Just go up to the sample code,
and it is available for you to look at.
Do a little bit about some
of the interface into the
Cocoa-based Print Dialog Extension.
It's all defined in
PDE plugin interface.h.
First of all,
we have the PDE plugin protocol.
Basically,
we're going to ask your plugin to give me
all your panels for this particular type,
whether it be page setup or print.
And the plugin would then return an
array of the PDE panel instances.
We go to PD panels.
We are going to ask you for your view.
We're going to tell you when
we're going to show you.
In other words,
the user has selected your panel.
We will tell you that you should hide.
This is your chance to validate
your user interface item and say,
oh, something's out of range.
Put up a dialog and return false and
then we won't switch and we won't
let the user switch to the panel.
Save values is basically when
we want you to write out your
settings to the print info.
And restore values is when we
want you to read the print info.
Say the user selected a preset.
We will then call your Print Dialog
Extension to say go back,
go reread the values and update your UI.
And the last one is PPD option
key value did change.
It has to do with constraints
handling which I'm going to
talk about in just a little bit.
This will add to the PDE plugin callback
protocol and this is how the PDE can
get information from the system and tell
the system it needs to do something.
So you can get the print session,
the settings, the format, the printer,
the PPD file.
And PanelView did resize saying,
"I'm the PDE, I changed my size.
I want the printing system to resize
the dialog around me." So that's
a call you would make and we tell
us that you changed the size.
We will reformat the dialog
so nothing gets hidden.
Here again,
this is the last one is another
PPD constraints call and we'll
talk about that in a little bit.
Now how do we get these PDEs to
show up in the Print Dialog?
For Carbon applications,
you just need to add the Print Dialog
Extension's key to your InfoP list,
which can give it the
PDEs that you want to show up,
and put the plug-in in your
application's plug-in directory.
For printer drivers,
you would just add this line
sum of this to your actual PPD,
AP Dialog Extension,
and then give us a path to your bundle.
PPD Constrain Handling is
something new in Leopard.
We've been talking about it for a while.
So application developers,
you can cover your ears
for the next couple,
three slides.
I'm sure some of the
developers back at Apple,
my coworkers would love to do,
but they can't.
It allows the user to resolve
conflicts between PPD-based features.
A simple example of this is,
say a printer can't
do duplex on envelope.
On previous systems,
we would just gray out
the conflicting items.
So say if they selected an envelope,
we would gray out the two-sided option.
The user would have no idea
why two-sided was grayed out.
They just know it was grayed out.
The other problem is it could
be in a totally separate panel.
The user has no clue
as to why something is
So what we are doing in Leopard
is the system is going to do the
constraint checking and then do the user
interaction to handle the conflicts.
So in this example,
we have the user selected
finishing options to staple.
The problem is output
destination is set to left bin.
You can't have both.
So what we do as a printing system,
we notice that and we
let the user choose.
Do they want to set output
destination to stapler,
which would allow them to set
the finishing options to staple,
or they can cancel out and say,
leave it the way it is,
I don't want to change it.
So as a PDE,
when the user makes a selection,
the PDE needs to make the callback,
we'll change PPD option key
value pair with the requested
PPD option choice pair.
In other words, this case it would be,
the PDE would say the user chose
finishing options setting to staple.
And then we would go through
all the PPD keywords,
make sure there wasn't any conflicts.
And if there was,
we would put up this dialogue to the user
and the user would decide what to do.
And we will return true to the
PDE if the user accepted the change
and also if no conflicts existed,
we return true.
Or true if there was a conflict and
the user said go ahead and change it.
A false return value
means the user said no,
I don't want to do anything.
So that PDE would then have to restore
the old UI to the previous settings.
Now what about the other person?
The PDE, the option that the
user did want to change.
So in this case,
output destination was set to stapler.
So if the user does accept a change
of the resolution that we suggested,
we're going to make the
method call PPD key value did
change to the supporting PDE.
In other words, the PDE that had,
what was it?
The output destination.
So we're going to call this method
with output destination set to stapler.
That other PDE will have to go
through and update its settings to
say that output is no longer left bin,
the output option is stapler.
On the topic of print drivers,
there's been a little bit of confusion as
to 64-bit and dealing with print drivers.
There's several aspects of this.
First one is the driver portions
that run in the application process.
If the application process
is running at 64-bit,
the PDEs need to have a 64-bit
slice in order to be loaded
into that 64-bit application.
The problem is the CF plug-in
carbon-based PDEs can
only be built as 32-bit,
so they will not be loaded.
This is due to many things,
some of them being the
non-composited window,
quick draw drawing that the
carbon-based PDEs are based on,
and many other issues.
Our solution is the CocoaBase PDEs.
They can be built and run
in a 64-bit application.
Cups, Filters, and Backends.
Unless there's a compelling need,
there's no need to be
[Transcript missing]
And the same thing with
Tyga printer drivers.
They are 32-bit only,
but they're in their own
process and they can still run.
They may be depth-created,
but they will still run.
Now, let's change gears again.
Let's talk about printer setup utility.
Currently we have three ways
to get the printer browser.
We have through the Print Dialog,
through the Print and Fax Pref pane,
and through Print Center.
We have two ways to
show a desktop printer.
Base again,
we have the Print and Fax Prep pane
and the Printer Setup Utility.
And then there's this.
It's a quite convoluted way for the user
to interact with the printing system.
There are too many ways for the user
A lot of users are being confused.
Okay, I don't know where to go to get to,
let's say, a desktop printer or
how to change something.
Do I go to the FaxPref?
Do I go to PrinterSight Utility?
What do I do?
We've solved that.
PrinterSight Utility is
going away in Leopard.
It is no longer part of Leopard
and the functionality has been
split between the Print & Fax Pref
pane and the desktop printers.
This is the current
PrintFX Printing Leopard.
It is currently a work in progress.
We expect many changes
for this to happen,
printing it up and such forth.
For now, we've added the action menu
to do some of the old printer
sub-utility tasks such as ink levels,
create a printer pool,
open the printer utility,
or to reset printing system.
Then we are using the printer
setup button to get and change
information about the printer.
Click this button, you'll get a sheet,
no more get info panel
with a little apply button.
We will,
and if you click on the general pane,
it allows for the renaming and
setting of the location and provides
information about the print queue.
Click on the driver panel,
you'll be able to change the
PPD associated with the printer
and change the installable
options for that printer.
We've also revamped the desktop printer.
A little bit of UI change,
but a lot more underneath.
One of the things we've changed is you
can always see the printer status no
matter which view you're looking at,
whether it be your current
jobs or your history.
We also are displaying
multiple error messages.
This is where the major change in
the desktop printer has happened.
We have totally revamped the status
handling of the desktop printers.
So we're now able to show multiple
error messages at the same time.
So you will know that you're low on
yellow ink and you're out of paper,
not just that you're low on yellow ink.
And another thing we've added,
there's no more three button alert
that does not have the button you want.
We've added a new printer browser,
another release of Operating Systems,
we have a new printer browser.
We actually call it the
Uber browser internally.
It displays multiple types of printers.
We display USB printers, Bonjour,
Share printers,
AppleTalk printers in your default zone,
Open Directory printers,
Bluetooth printers,
and SMP lookup printers via CUPS.
As you can imagine back at Apple on
the printing local network,
we have quite a few printers
that show up on our network.
So we are now allowing filtering
based on multiple columns.
And here I am just showing of the
hundreds of printers that are on our net,
I just want to look at
all Bonjour HP printers.
Then we'll filter that list to show only
the printers that you're interested in.
And the same thing when
you're looking for a PPD.
Now I'm looking for the HP 9500,
I just type HP 9500 and it will only
show those PPDs that match those words.
Talk a little bit about
deprecated printing APIs.
The current printing APIs that
are deprecated will not be
available to 64-bit applications.
They're not in the binary.
We've deprecated quite a few
methods and functions over the years.
And our header files have been getting
harder and harder to read to determine
what is deprecated and what is not.
So one of the engineers at Apple took
great pains and a lot of work-- thank
you-- to basically split out all of our
deprecated functions into separate files.
Now we have PM definitions,
and we've added PM definitions
deprecated.h that will include all
the methods that have been deprecated.
Same thing for PM core, PM application,
PM printing dialog extensions,
and such-fors.
Only valid functions and constants
are now in the main header files.
Let's talk a little bit about the
APIs that have been decorated.
We've been telling you for quite
a number of years these printing
APIs are going away and guess what?
They're gone,
especially for 64-bit applications.
Quick Draw is gone.
Functions that deal with
PIC with PostScript are gone.
the current session,
the old non-session APIs are gone.
Functions that deal with
current printer are gone.
Another thing, these are really old.
Functions that deal with handles,
functions that deal with
the Mac OS 9 print records,
and the old append-dental
method of adding items to
the print dialogs are gone.
The last item on deprecated APIs.
The Carbon, as I mentioned before,
the Carbon PDE API is 32-bit only.
Use the CocoaBase PDs instead.
The PPD is 32-bit only as well,
as well as Tiger printer drivers.
And I know Rich talked
about this last year,
I'm going to talk about it again.
Another call for WYSIWYG.
Where possible, use your document window
to show your print view.
Don't do it in the print dialog.
Let the user reformat the page and edit
the data while they're in the print view.
If it's a good print view,
if it's a good print format,
it's likely to be a good
presentation format.
We are working very hard on making this
much easier for Cocoa applications.
It's not in the seed yet,
but we are working on,
for Cocoa applications,
providing a print view,
providing controls that will allow
the application developer to change
aspects dealing with the print view.
This is an example of a good example,
the iPhoto card calendar and book view.
This is what's going to be printed,
but yet it allows you to edit
while you're in this view.
Here you can change the picture,
change the size, move it around,
edit the text.
You can do everything you want to that
would affect how this card is printed.
Other good examples are
FileMaker PrintView,
Pages, TextEdit with Raptor Page,
the Chronos, Soho, Labels and Envelopes,
and Adobe Lightroom.
These are all great examples that
allow you to edit while you're seeing
what's going to actually print.
And as Paul mentioned, not Paul,
Rich mentioned last year,
bad examples are sadly still too many and
and too embarrassing to enumerate all the
things that we would like to see changed.
We ask that you avoid a separate dialogue
before putting up the print dialogue.
Realize we are on the way
for some of the applications.
We are working to remove those obstacles,
but please if you can't,
avoid a separate dialogue before
bringing up the print dialogue.
Another thing is you may be heading
in the wrong direction if you're
adding formatting options that cannot
be previewed by your application.
So in summary,
the application now determines
what options are available to
the user in the Print Dialog.
Page Setup should only
be for Document Format.
If you're a non-document
based application,
it might make sense for you to
add the Page Active Use options
to the Print Dialog.
We're asking Cocoa applications
to switch using the new
NS Print Accessory Controllers.
And Carbon applications and
print driver developers should
switch to using COCO-based PDEs.